Part I.
Here in the Forest, afar and free
From the City’s enervate luxury—
Luxury that ne’er attains
To comfort, swallowing all its gains—
That seldom knows, and ne’er enjoys
Or health, or peace, for dust and noise;
And reached not by those senseless rules
That Folly cons in Fashion’s schools;—
When first beyond the skiey trees
That fringe some dawning height,
Aurora spreads her traceries
Of grey and golden light—
Whilst yet the western stars may be
Glimmering far and fitfully,
As they were tarrying,—fain to pay
Apostate homage to the day;—
Glad as the spirit of the song
Poured by the birds from every spray,a
And fresh and lithe as are the young

Pure airs that, from the dayspring sprung,
All bear in their salubrious play
That morning merriment along;
From a peace-curtained sleep we rise,
Such as can never comfort Wrong,
To look abroad with grateful eyes,
While sallying forth to till the soil,
Or urge in the Forest some manly toil.

Or while Eurokab first displays
His burning rim on the ancient hill,
And the yet dusky world o’erlays
With fanwise spreading, arrowy rays,
And rising gradual, greatens still—
Greatens, till in full revealed
Like a vast and flaming shield
Poised on that glorious eastern height,
He floods abroad his golden light
In one unbroken mass immense
Of life-essential influence:
Unveiling the glades of the forest then,
And the winding depths of each shadowy glen,
And sheathing every tripping stream
With a sudden bickering gleam,
That curving with them, here and there
Breaks oft into a lambent glare:
While thus Euroka riseth red,
Up, even to the kingly head
Of some proud eminence, we climb,
Where high amid the crags sublime,
Australia’s yet unchristened Muse,
A wandering Spirit of beauty rare,
Loves oft to gem her streaming hair
With heaven’s selectest dews,
And scarf her bosom bright and bare
With a robe of Morning richest hues;
Giving the while to all objects there,

All sounds,—the water drip just heard—
The hum of insect—voice of bird,—
To every echo and every air
A poetry unfelt elsewhere.

Lo, bodying forth to Fancy’s eye
The glenward hanging clouds among,
Her visioned Train goes gliding by.
—First, orbed as in a floating sphere
Of rainbow-colored splendor, strong
Though simple Faith, and her confrere,
Even Wonder, both star-crowned, appear,
Twin Eons of all deathless song.
Then all in love, though calm of mien,
On these still gazing as along
She fareth, Contemplation’s seen
With dark-eyed Memory hand in hand.
Then followed by a bright-haired band
Of cherub Joys,—lo, Temperance,
And Charity, and Self-command,
In sage fraternity advance.
Next pass, with sturdy Industry
And Concord for their sure defence,
Those philosophic sisters three—
Patience, Content, and Constancy.
Here baby-featured Innoncence
To Wisdom meditation-pale,
And lofty-browed Benevolence,
Laughs forth her happy tale.
There stalks with rapture-lengthened stride
Prophetic Feeling, side by side
With Liberty—both ardent-eyed.
Then Duty as a shepherd clad,
And Piety sedately glad,

Precede Integrity long tried,
And inward-smiling Peace, and she—
A pleading angel—Charity.
—Last of all the visioned throng
Two wingëd Spirits seem to speed,
As blameful of the past were they
For hindering them so long—
Even Love and Hope, who seem alway
About to do their happiest deed,
And breathe their sweetest song.

Many an eminent hill sublime
Has this great Isle like that we climb:
Beyond the loud Napean they rise,
And by old Hawksbury’s billowy tide,
And by the rapid Hunter’s side,
And where, seen but by woodsmen’s eyes,
Full oft some wild creek darkling lies,
Or with a sudden and strenuous chide
Or with a broken and lowly moan,
Adown its rocky channel hies;—
Girt with wood to the craggy cone,
Up they go into the skies,
O’er slopes and vales and prairies lone
Staring as with stony eyes.

Now from some Crag brushed by the green
Fresh sprays, wind-floated to and fro—
The extremest sprays of stately treen
That find their roots in the ravìne
A dizzy depth below,
Send the glad eye their vistas through,
Out and o’er a glorious View!
—Here, veined with brooks that glitter and glow,

Wide ever-verdant dales, between
The mountains, like green bays, are seen
Forth winding—till they grow
By distance brown, then dim and grey—
Then into mere gaps narrowing, they
Behind those folding mountains go
Upon their hidden way.
X Elsewhere located plains appear
As garnished by a genial year
With Husbandry’s fair births—the soil
Confessing well the Settler’s toil.
Rich orchards on the higher mould
Hang forth their treasures manifold
In globes and clusters to the sun
Whose course in heaven is now begun,
While gardens, deep in vinage, smile
Where into nooks the hollows run;
And where but dank lagoons erewhile
Slept, and where yet the blind creekc strays,
There fields of tall and tassalled maize
Stretch rank on rank away,
Even as embattled legions stand
Ere Slaughter’s dread unsparing hand
Has mowed them with her thunder-brand,

And shattered their array.
And where, mid these, oft stands a dwelling
As from a verdant ocean swelling,
Hearth-smokes in wreathen pillars grow
Quietly up in the stirless air,
Ascending peacefully heavenward so
Like metaphors of prayer:
While from the steaming yards about
The spotty kine move slowly out;
And from the fold on yon bare slope
That bounds the cultivated scope,
Forth there floods a fleecy flock,
Even as from some mountain lock
A sudden inundation flows
In volume, spreading as it goes.
And as the eye outruns it, through
Inbroken depths of forest view,
Or ‘tween some far creek’s oaken rows,
Fresh objects rise, like spectral shows
Upcrowding small, and yet more small,
And as if intervolving all,
So vaguely to the eye they swim
In the mighty distance dim.

But hark! on yon high-waving bough
That strokes yon rack as it passeth now,
The purple-headd with flutter gay

Gurgles forth his roundelay;
And oh! in his melodious moods
What thrilling meaning findeth aye
Some listening Beauty of the Woods?
Again his passion-tingling wings
Quiver, half spread;—again he flings
Abroad the tale of his innocent thrall;
While mingling, from the lower dells
A many-warbled chorus swells:
The pipe of the brown thrush, to call
His wandered mistress lifted high—
The wren’s soft trill—the parrot’s cry—
With the sounding troll of the valorouse pie,

And the bell-bird’s pensive tinklef—all
In their so varied melody blent
Into one wild-wood merriment,
Swell up and over each craggy wall:
Or Jehug in a fitful smack
Ends his long note;—the piercing crack
Rages along with a gathering shock
As Echo starts out from her cave in the rock,
To wanton abroad in the hollow breeze
And dizzy the ear with her impish glees,
Till from below the thronging strain
Of warbled joy comes through again

But oft these near delights foregoing,
Soon as the morning star is glowing,
The earliest Hunter’s cheery call
Is passed along from house to house
Some tardy inmate to arouse—
Until the younger neighbors all
Are forth, each followed by his hounds:
Then quickly gathered in a knot
Upon the old accustomed spot
They wake the Morn with merry sounds,
As oft they hie the Forest through
To hunt the boundingh kangaroo.

Far from all urban dust and noise,
Such are the inland dweller’s joys;
Joys leaving him little besides to need
In yielding him what is riches indeed!
What flows for him from many a spring,
And rides on every breeze’s wing—
That priceless part of Nature’s wealth,
That inward morning sunshine—Health!
The sacred source of usefulness—
Best smoother of Life’s rugged path,
Best lightener of its worst distress!
Which absent, even young Love hath
Nor will to serve, nor strength to bless!
Which absent, even air-blown beds
Are granite slabs to weary heads!
And mitre, coronet, and crown
But weigh their purple wearers down!
For to Disease all fortune’s rays
Are warmthless, like the fen-fire’s blaze;
And glory’s animative power
Serves but to throne Regret, as showing
How flies unsiezed some star-crowned hour—
Or is only a sunbeam glowing
Round the head of a cankered flower.

a It is a very prevalent, but an erroneous notion, that the birds of Australia are almost destitute of song. Often, indeed, our birds are wanting in sweetness of voice, and their song is yet more often defective, perhaps, in volume and continuity. But this is far from being the case universally. The magpie, for a familiar instance, has not only a merry, but a most musical chaunt. One set, in particular, of gurgling undertones which this bird warbles as it were to itself, when perched up in the cool,—that is, in some dense-topped oak or apple tree, of a hot summer noontide,—is melodious to degree almost incredible.

There is also a kind of dwarf magpie, sometimes confounded by lax observers with the butcher-bird, which is very notable for the extreme beauty of its voice. When several of these birds are assembled together in the same tree, or clump of trees, a concert of sweet sounds in the wonted consequence,—sounds mellow and soothing as the purer tones of the flute, with occasional clarionet-like outgushes that are enchantingly spirited and musical. Of the notes of the true butcher-bird or “old soldier,” I have heard it admitted, even by persons somewhat prejudiced against everything Australian, that in richness and volume they compete with those of the nightengale, though they fail to sustain the duel, in respect of a certain varied and impetuous continuity. Several of our smaller birds too—birds yet nameless and fast becoming extinct—have a surpresing variety of notes; and when many of such birds are heard (as I have heard them) all warbling together, the effect is strikingly musical. Even the cries of the many parrot kinds, though somewhat harsh and discordant, are yet exceedingly gladsome. When indeed, of a summer evening,—up aloft in the apple or gum trees,—there happens to be a great gathering together of the higher flying kinds—those which never alight on the ground, the blue mountainer, with the greater and lesser green parrakeet—there is afload in the air on all sides a mad merriment of sound, that can only be well characterised as somewhat bewilderingly hilarious. In newly settled localities, of a Spring or Autumn morning, I have heard the whole forest vocally alive and as it were electric, with the wild, shrill, intermixing peans of birds, than which, in many instances, nothing could be more sweet and joyous, or taking them altogether, more primatively exhilarating.

b Euroka is an aboriginal name of the sun. It is at once euphonious and robust, and has therefore a certain sounding adequacy as a vocable, and thence somewhat of ideal unison with the golden progression and godlike port of that paramount luminary. And for these reasons, I have here ventured, for once at least, to adopt it.

c The channels or water-courses of summer shrunk lagoons are called blind creeks. The term, I believe, is of Colonial growth, and is very appropriate; these channels being mostly so matted over with sedge, sags, and other water grasses, as not to be distinguishable from the general bed of the lagoon—until the novice “in such branches of learning”, like Richmond and his host (though in a different sense) has marched perhaps “into the bowels of the land.” I have heard the term also applied to mountain gulches run only in rainy seasons, or after a heavy thunder storm. Blind, that is without the light of water, as seen generally. But can we credit the popular perception with any such fineness, or suppose the term to have thus lying as it were esotericatty under it even a gleam of poetry?

d A little elegantly formed bird, having a remarkably varied and pleasing song. It is somewhat rare, even in the newest localities, and not knowing its name (if it has other than an aboriginal one) I have here called it after the most striking part of its plumage.

e The Australian magpie called the ‘black-and-white’, to distinguish it from another less spotted species does most decidedly merit to be thus mainly characterised by the epithet valorous. In breeding time this kind of magpie is fierce even to fearlessness; and not only will the cock bird readily give battle to any of the falco genus that may approach nearer to his young than he is inclined to consider consistent with perfect honesty of intention, but, assisted by his mate, he will pursue to a distance, and sometimes overtake and absolutely kill the common chicken hawk—a bit of ultra determination on his part, of which upon one occasion I was myself an eye-witness. Nay, he will make good his claim to exceeding valorousness by attacking even the lords of the creation. The Author has had his hat dashed off by a bird of this kind, while passing unwittingly under the tree in which it had built its nest, to his no small alarm at the moment, he being wholly unexpectant of any such pugnacious salute, and quite unadvised as to the nature of the assailant. On an occasion like this, the parentally aroused magpie will come whizzing down at you with a really startling impetuosity, and you will hear his horny mandibles snap,—close against your cheek perhaps,—with the severity of an iron rat-trap.

f This remarkable little bird is chiefly to be found in such mountain ravines as reserve a constant supply of water—its note being an infallible assurance of the vicinity of that element;—that it is lying in the rock-tanks somewhere at hand, however hiddenly, or noiselessly sliding through some concealed cleft. Hence, though its note is pensive in seeming, it is exceedingly grateful to the thirsty wayfarer, who happens to be well enough up in bush matters to be advised of the fact. Each bird emits but a single sound, like the one tinkle of a small bell; but when there are many of them in the immediate vicinity, as there mostly are, disposed at unequal distances in the surrounding trees, an irregular chime—”most musical, most melancholy”—is kept ringing about one with an effect that is very wild and singular,and though always by association somewhat lonesome, yet pleasing in the extreme.

The bell bird is rather less in size than a ground parrakeet; and its general color, a sort of red green or green red, is very conspicuously tipped with a bright yellow bill.

g The bird whose note is here described is an inhabitant of densely wooded dells having water in them, and of thick white-cedar brushes near mountain creeks; for its note, like that of the bell-bird, infallibly indicates the vicinity of water. The bird itself is commonly called the coachman, a name evidently suggested by the resemblance of its note to that peculiar sort of whistle by which carriage horses are incited forward, and by the further circumstance of its ending in a sharp snap nearly as loud as the crack of a whip, and very much like it. I have here written Jehu instead, thinking it quite as characteristic in its way, and certainly (though I am anything but squeamish in such matters)a trifle more poetic.

Jehu, the coachman, or what we will, is nearly the size of a thrush, and is a ground-keeping bird of rather weak flight. Its whole back is of a dark green, and its whole breast brown. The hen bird is very plain, but the cock has a long tail which it wags and occasionally fans, a white blaze about the throat, and a somewhat gay-looking crest or frilled top-knot.

But there are several varieties of this kind of bird, larger and smaller, and somewhat different in note, especially in the loudness and sharpness of the concluding snap.

h We say the bounding—the bounding horse, and so forth; but how peculiarly emphatic is the epithet when applied, as here, to the motions of the kangaroo! No doubt the running of most animals at the top of their speed is a bounding forward from the hind feet upon the for[e], or in the case of bipeds generally, from one foot upon the other; but in none is it, to the instant perception of the eye, so markedly and specifically a bounding, as in the running of the kangaroo.