The Kangaroo Hunt,
or
A Morning in the Mountains:
A Descriptive Poem in/ Six Parts:
By Charles Harpur.
An Australian
(The Muse) doth tell me where to borrow
Comfort in the midst of sorrow;
Makes the desolatest place
To her presence be a grace.
x x x

In my former days of bliss
Her divine skill taught me this,
That from everything I saw,
I could some invention draw.

George Wither.

Preface.
The first draft of the following Descriptive Poem was written many years ago, and referred to a period yet earlier, when the habits and pastimes of the inland-dwelling Colonists were much more simple than they are at present, and when the horse was a possession too rare and valuable to be used in the rough hap-hazzards of a Bush Hunt, or even, except on great emergency, upon a mountain journey. Nay, during the early Colonial period to which it refers, even a gun was a somewhat scarce article, or one not often employed in Kangaroo hunting, while powder and shot were far too expensive to be blazed away freely. That golden prosperity which has made us so luxurious, and even prodigal, as a community of Colonists, is of a comparatively recent growth—as recent in fact as the auriferous discoveries which it followed, and which have mainly contributed to it.

The Poem is designed to picture a morning in the mountains, with a Kangaroo Hunt for the centre and pivot of the performance: one hunt only, because there would be too much sameness in a succession of “runs” for particular description. For the purpose, however, of bringing as many characteristic circumstances as possible into this one, the Kangaroo is carried over more ground than he would, with swift hounds at his heels, be likely to cover in an actual case, unless endowed with an extraordinary degree of both speed and endurance. But to render this the more probable, he is allowed, through an error of his pursuers, to get considerably a-head of them about the middle of the Hunt. And also, in keeping the hunters well up with the hounds, for the sake of imparting a wholeness and an animation to that part of the description, many advantages are thrown into them, in thecast of the ground and otherwise, which they would not often be favored with in any given locality.

The personal digressions in the fifth Part are not indulged in for their own sake merely. They are a part of the design of the Poem, being introduced for the purpose of filling up as pleasingly as the scope and keeping of the subject admitted, the pause which is there given to the description of the kangaroo’s flight and the pursuit of the hounds;—there happening to be, in these respects, just then, nothing worthy of particular mention, after the advantage accruing to the former, through an error of the latter, which is noticed in the conclusion of Part IV.

The Scenery of the Poem, as a whole, does not answer to any particular locality. But such of the more remarkable features of Australian scenery as the Author was acquainted with, have been brought together (as in a pictorial composition) in the several descriptions. Those, for example, in the body of the piece, are suitable, in the main, to those of almost any of our wild mountain districts; while the prospect given in the Introduction (as the whole of the first Part may be considered) might be made, with trifling allowances, to apply to many of the newer Settlements on the banks of our inland streams—around which the face of nature, under the improving operations of civilised man, has already yielded up much, and is daily resigning more, of its aboriginal cast and character. And on this head it is to be further observed, that the mountains amongst which the Hunt is supposed to be laid, though bold and even sublime in many of their aspects, are not generally either very lofty or very precipitous. They are, in fact, craggy hills rather than mountains—the real mountains ranging immediately at the back, though often extending forward into the midst of them, in the shape of a gigantic bluff or of an abrupt elbow: and though in many places perilously craggy, they are yet wound along and shelfed as it were by grassy terraces, almost void of rocks, and letting off laterally into slopes of open forest—the whole together forming an accessible though a somewhat broken and difficult coursing country.

But in the above scenic conditions, there are ample scope and materials for the picturesque: and, moreover, I believe that, as an object of sublimity, there is no great difference between a mountain two thousand feet high and one twice that height, when beheld separately. Nay, the lesser mountain, if more precipitous, and bold in its outlines, will be even the sublimer object of the twain—and this, too, the nearer we approach it. Mere bulk, as an element of the wonderful, is more dependant upon the bodily eye, and also upon instant objective comparison, than any other constituent of the Sublime; and hence it is, that over a certain height in a mountain —say two thousand feet or so—it requires a very great addition indeed, to make a difference that is immediately or ocularly perceptible—except at such a distance on the horizon, as would all but nullify the effect of any sublime superiority therefrom accruing.

At all events, for poetic purposes, mere bulk need not to be very much relied upon or primarily sought after. The suggestiveness of the treatment in matters of magnitude—the imaginative manner of handling them—is nearly everything. Hence Olympus and the highest Himmilayan, to which it is but a mole-hill, may be made to look equally mighty in verse. Nay, with the Ideal bending over it, and enskying it as it were with the poetic heaven of the historic Past, the larger majesties will dwell, like the Homeric Gods, upon the peaks of Olympus. The scenic imagery of the Bible, though often so ruggedly sublime, was the product of a country whose mountains, speaking literally, are but rocky hills. See also the mighty effect which Shakspere has wrought, in poetic picture, and by virtue of a certain mental intensity of treatment, out of the comparatively insignificant Cliff of Dover. Nay, a rock rift of but twenty feet in depth is a sturdy miniature of the wildest Alpine gorge, and when beheld with such a reference, through an imaginary process of self-diminution, becomes savagely sublime. So much does the grandeur of bulk depend upon the grandeur of form; and both these again, however strikingly blended, may be raised almost immeasurably by poetic intensification.

Moreover,—except when a limited local reference happens to be historical to the subject,—the Poet, in picturing nature, should never pin himself to the particular, or to the locally present. The Proseman may do this at all times, and insist upon the merit of his parochial closeness; but the Poet must not: for if he do, his draft will be but a vague account at the best,—not a poetic picture. But he should paint her primarily through his imagination; and thus the striking features and colors of many scenes, which lie permanently gathered in his memory, becoming, with their influences, idealised in the process, will be essentially transfused up a few, or even upon one scene—one happy embodiment of her wildest freaks, or one Eden-piece embathed with a luminous atmosphere of sentiment. But never by wholesale will this transfusion be made, or indiscriminately; but in judicious keeping with the design and scope of his subject as a picture, and exactly according to its special limits and likelihoods as a landscape. And though what is thus painted may be raised in beauty or wildness above the average of any given exhibition of these qualities, it may yet, as a picture, be profoundly true to Nature, or to that flow and expression of character which such qualities best conform to, when we either locally exalt or locally concentrate her style. Thus it is truth sublimated, compressed, epitomised;—truth raised to its height, or strained away through the alembic of invention from whatever is unsightly or merely wearisome, and presented anew, though in vision, in its selectest forms and possibilities. For though, as a matter of art, it comes to us or is presented through the invention of the Poet, yet to him it came,—not literally, as in the picture before us, but in all the elements of that picture,—direct from Nature. In fine, if the Poet has been wholly true to his missionary insight in the first place, and to his re-creative instincts in the next, the license taken, and the modifications made by art, will reach only to its pictorial manner and assemblage of objects: in its spirit it will still be very Nature; while in its effect, as an esthetic success, it will be Something yet more precious—a mind-enclosed possession, and thence a “joy for ever.”

The versification of the Poem throughout is designedly irregular, or what is commonly thought to be so,—and indeed, is so, under the established standards. But when composing it, I concieved that such an unconfined, many-metred structure of verse as might be varied and paragraphically moulded (after the manner of a musical movement) to the peculiar demands of every occasion, and appear therefore to result spontaneously from the very nature of the things depicted, would be most conducive to the effective treatment of a subject, the art-interest of which would depend so largely upon its metrical vehicle. And though I have since become aware that Coleridge has said something of a like purport in reference to the versification of his Christabel, yet I can affirm that when writing this piece I had never read a line of that Poem, or indeed, of any production whatever that was professedly imitative of it, either in respect of its style, or in any other respect. My design, therefore, was so far original. And this design, I am sure, was in itself a good one, however I may have failed in carrying it out. But I do not think that I have therein failed. On the contrary, I flatter myself, that the style of the verse, though it may not at first be thought altogether pleasing by some readers, will yet, on a second and more studied perusal, commend itself to the critical, as being in the main appropriate to the matter—and if so, essentially harmonious.

Euroma, 1863.