Part III.
Ranged are the nearer hills, and scowered
Those vales o’er which too oft are poured
From Wealth’s full hives amid the woods
Their fleecy swarms, for wild-born broods
Such as they one time only knew,
To won about them, many or few:
These ebbing back, as those intrude,
On some yet trackless solitude;
Even such as shall ere long unfold
Its game-grazed scope to those Hunters bold,
Making the gladdest gladder.—See,
Merry men I trow they be!
Or straggling out—or side by side—
‘Tis theirs, thus in the Forest green,
To mix with manhood’s vigorous pride,
The glad surprise, the relish keen,
And all the unresisted glee
Of boyhood’s large sincerity.
—Mark with what fire each eye is filled—
The inbreathed soul of the ancient wild!
Mark with life each motion’s willed!
Were ever the nerves of the city child
Thus, like a harp’s chords, thrilled?

Yon grassy Nook, of forest bare,
But belted round with cedars high,
And clumped with vine-brakes here and there,
A famous place was wont to be
For game in days gone by,
And thitherward half habitually

The expectant Hunter’s hie:
Recounting, as they view the grounds
The former feats of favorite hounds—
Who as their masters tell the same,
Wistfully catch the blazoned name,
And, as if conscious of their praise,
Prance round them with a brawny grace.

That Nook is passed—its pillary wall
Of bordering wood now hides them all,
As under its leafy arches they
With echoing tread pursue their way:
And soon the bird of a wilder scene
Is starting to see them loom between
The boles of mighty trees that ne’er
Quaked at heart in dim dismay
To hear the axe loud-ringing there.
And if, because their outward way
Hath bootless been as yet,
Some one should thoughtlessly essay
To make the hounds curvet,
Or to beguile the idle time
Give lusty voice to a hunting rhyme,
Right quickly shall another chide
That trifler—he who, sharper-eyed,
All on a sudden hath heedfully spied
In the grey dust laid by the heavy dews
Fresh-seeming tracks;—each closely views
The nearer shrubs, as well aware
How surely it may be seen,
If brushed by aught in its passage there
Since the dayspring’s dawning sheen,
Ever so lightly those shrubs have been,
In the midst of their lustrous mates they’ll stand

Like serfs amongst ladies and lords of the land.a

But strictliest there is noise forbid
Where deep inshelves some Cave’s grey lid;
For if the Spirits of that Cave
Be loudly roused, unchecked they’ll rave—
Visiting each rocky den
That doth a viewless Sister hide,
Till every Echo along the glen
Take up the alarum and drive it wide
O’er scenes where yet, close-couched and warm,
The game-flocks doze unweeting harm.
—There, as they pass below the crags
Whence wild-figs, rooted ‘twixt their jags,
Slant fringing forth against the sky,
The eagle watching o’er his brood,
Views with spread wings and angry cry
The invaders of his solitude.

Nor moves the lightest tongue beside
The creek that, sliding from some ledge
Where the cool mountain springs abide,
Then lists yon fern-flat’s hither edge
For yesterday there, at eventide,
If shepherd John said truth,—as home
He drove his flock in the gathering gloom,
A solitary flyerb was spied.

Obsequious to the signed command
The hounds all come to a sudden stand,
Or slink to their masters’ side,
Whose practised eyes explore the place,
Before ’tis crossed with their wonted pace.

At length a belt of cedars tall,
In a broad scoopc, and undertwined

With brushwood of each flaunting kind,
And with the rankest vines,—is all
That, interposing, hides a Scene
Where Hunter never hath bootless been.
—’Tis entered, and a sound upsprings
Of lashing boughs and rushing wings!
In a desultorious throng
What birds their varied plumes display!
See, flashing upward and along,
How many and beautiful are they!
On burnished wings in sounding flight
The pigeon hurries—swift and strong!
And the yerowalasd unfold
Up in the cedar’s branching height

Their pinions washed with verdant gold,
Then fleetly flaming to the light
Under some gleaming strip of sky,
Each one singly hits the eye
Like a volant crysolite!
Or the rosella glories through
The boughs, and with its green and blue
And orange chequering on the sight,
Seems it not, thus passing bright,
Some radiancy of rainbow birth,
Slightly tarnished—by the damp
Of its after-life on earth:
Or the scarlet satin birde
Hangeth like a golden lamp
Where the berried bough is stirred;

While haply the king parrot, showing
Full aloft his broad red breast,
Like a vast blood-rich ruby glowing,
Near it boldly sits at rest.
Or troops of rooks in loud alarm
Mount the trees from arm to arm;f

While crowds of nameless twittering things
With rich-ringed glossy eyes, and necks
All streaked and interstreaked, and wings
Spangled with rows of spark-like specks,
And tails with broad-barred blazonings,
And crimson backs, and bosoms bright
As the breast of a cloud in a sunset sky,
Or glance afar in gleamy flight
O’er leafy domes upheaping high,
Or lighten through the nearer shade,
Or sparkle aloft like stars new-rayed
Or stream in flocks, fright-disarrayed,
Like shattered meteors by.g

With these the noisy yellow-bill,
And the ground parrakeeth, screaming shrill
As out of some high tussock near
Its starts at once into the clear,
And seems while swiftly shooting higher
Imped with plumes of subtle fire
So vividly it hues the light
As thus it blazes forth in flight:
And the whirring quail that skims the brush,

The soaring piei and the dodging thrush,
Precede the Hunter as he pushes
Through clinging vines and flaunting bushes,
And sternly chides the loitering dog
That scents the cat in the hollow log,
Or one that in pursuit would fly
As oft the duarallij rushes bounding by.

Soon as that lofty Wood is pass’d,
Whilst even yet it shades the last,
Lo, swimming dim on the staggered eye
As it lay loose against the sky,
A Prospect wide and vast!
O’er which the morning’s mist yet keeps
Cragging up in broken heaps
Wherever the eye is cast.
Here grassy slopes, all queenly gay
Save where embossed with clumps of broom
Wide straggling out like clouds astray,
Heave up, as they were pressed for room,
Their broad breasts to the opening day;
There steep and rocky ridges loom
Out from a sea-resembling gloom,

With peaks of iron grey,
And bank yon gorge that ‘neath their throng
Of shadowsk, broken, broad and long,
Winds like a Giant’s path away.
Full in its midst a rill’s deep course
Leads on the eye to its flashing source
Welled in yon Alp that, wedged between
The gap’s grim jaws, shuts in the Scene.
Its high bare back keeps half the blue
Expanse of heaven out of view,
And thence forth jutting, grey and grim,
Its cliffs expose their caverns dim.
Broods o’er the whole a dread repose
That far a pleasing horror throws,
While ever in the spectral glooms
That cling about those craggy domes—
Those mist-glooms, gapped with door-like rents
That let to inward-folding spaces,
As they were mighty phantom tents
Pavilioning those lonely places—
Wonder (her wild self a dream)
Lone wandering near them, loves to deem
That elemental Spirits dwell
And brew the charm and breathe the spell
That prosper those who meet them well.
For always she hears on such cavernous height

A whisper by day and a moan by night,
With oft a strange aerial sigh
Wasting in the stillness by,
Though not the faintest breathing air
Shall give one leaf to quiver there.
Fittest site whereon to try
The mental gold of Poësy,
Or woo the mood that wings the soul
And bears it to some visioned goal.
There brightens Memory tearful eye,
And Sorrow herself forgets to sigh;
While bardic rapture kindling clear
As in its most primeval sphere,
With a reflected insight rays
Even Apathy’s else-stony gaze;
And, to a nearer Heaven, her prayer
Religion best prefers,—a meek enthusiast there.

a That is to say, such of the bushes as had recently been shaken by any creature of the size of the kangaroo passing amongst them, would be partly or altogether dewless, while the rest would still [be] spangled all over with the lustres of the morning.

b Namely, a young doe kangaroo. A young buck of the same age would be called a ‘large flyer’, an old one being generally and venerably cognominated an ‘old man’. A bushman, for example, trumpeting forth the merits of a particular hound, would assure you that the said hound had, single-handed, ran into and killed a regular old man and no mistake,—a most ugly customer, in short, and veritable grey father of the forest, standing full as high as himself, even in his boots. And for the aged doe:—one day, as they story goes, a newly arrived Pat--lander came bustling up to his hut mate, to tell him that the dogs had just ran into and killed a very large kangaroo “along wid the creek beyant” Ha! said the latter, an old man, I suppose. No thin, replied Tague, but a great big ould woman.

I do not know of there being any distinguishing term for the mature doe, other than ‘large flyer’ in common with the young buck; than which, however, she is somewhat fleeter—that is for a burst. But if the young buck have a good start of the hounds, he will generally, from his more muscular build and freshness of constitution, maintain the longest flight.

c Or dip in the land, regularly bevelling from side to side, as if scooped out by art; and which dips or scoops are often several miles long, by about a quarter of a mile wide, though in places much narrower. And even when they occur on table lands, or on the backs of broad ridges, the soil in them, being chiefly an alluvion from the rising ground on either side, is more than commonly, and often wonderfully fertile. Hence they are always thickly timbered, and with trees of an extraordinary height, and are densely brushed besides with white cedars kerrijongs, and a great variety of wild vines and wood creepers. Out of this undermass of umbrage, the boles of the taller trees shoot up like crowds of pillars, supporting far aloft a second edition of dense foliage interwoven with runners of the kind described in a note to a subsequent portion of the poem; and which upper masses of greenery, but for these its pillar-like supports, were not unlike, in distant appearance, to a long and heapy stratum of darkly verdant cloud;—nay, even with them, and at any distance, they are very suggestive of some such pictorial comparison or mental association of objects.

The multitude and variety of the feathered inhabitants of localities such as these are accounted for by the fact, that many of the vines and creepers peculiar to them, are exceedingly prolific of seed-berries, and are besides the “murmurous haunts of innumerable insects.

d Yerowala is an aboriginal name of the blue-mountain parrot—the most splendid, to my thinking, of all our parrots. The rosella may be the more showy bird for a moment, or at first view, but even it will bear no set comparison with the yerowala. Those persons who have only seen this bird when encaged, can have but a very imperfect notion of its native beauty, or of this beauty in its integrity. To arrive at an adequate idea of this, we must snare or shoot in the forest a full plumed cock yerowala; and then the lustrous green of the whole back and wings, the bright yellow of the breast, and the indescribable blue of the head, do indeed compose for it an array most royal.

e This species of the satin bird is somewhat rare. The whole of the back, including the wings, is of a bright red or scarlet. In a commoner sort the back and wings are of a glossy black; and in another species, if I recollect aright, the same divisions of the plumage are of a vivid straw color. But our future ornithologists will look in vain for many kinds of birds which they will find mentioned in the earlier Colonial records. Being rare even at first, these beautiful creatures often become extinct, and partly for the reason, that not only species, but whole genera of birds, are confined in Australia to special, and in some cases, very limited localities. I do not know whether this is so much the case in other new countries, but any observer of such matters who has travelled far into our interior, must be well aware that such is very remarkably the fact here. I have myself seen two sorts of parrots in the Kerrijong district alone, that I have never seen elsewhere, and particular birds in particular localities that I have never beheld out of them. Nay, I saw, when a boy, in the woods about Windsor, no less than four peculiar kinds of birds, which I have never since met with, although I have travelled extensively over the country, and in almost every direction.

The unchecked increase of the large tree-climbing gwana in the waste portions of those districts in which the aboriginals have become extinct or nearly so, is a main cause of the extinction as well of many kinds of our native birds. So numerous have these gwanas become in the woods of our partially located districts, that in passing through these at midsummer, we are apt to start one of them up every second or third tree; and hence, in such places, only the nests of such birds as incubate early in the Spring are wholly exempt from the liability of being ravaged by them. I have myself, in the space of a mile, walked over as many as twenty nests, which these destructive creatures, after tearing them out of the boughs, had then plundered of the eggs or young, and dropt upon the ground. And if only for this reason, it is a pity that we Colonists do not esteem them as great a table delicacy as our sable forerunners—the former lords of the soil—undoubtedly did. For no doubt, when not too old, they are excellent eating,—something in taste, as well as in appearance, between fish and fowl;—and when baked, as the Blacks bake them,—that is, covered up like a damper in hot ashes, they have an exceedingly rich and stomach- provoking savour.

f What is here called the rook is a gregarious bird having much the appearance of our black or migratory magpie, but with less white under the wings and none in the tail. When at rest or alight, it appears to be thoroughly black, the white spots under the wings being only perceptible while they are spread in flight. On being started from the ground, where it feeds, it flies heavily to one of the lower arms of the nearest tree, from which it then hops to a higher, as described in the text, rounding the trunk at each stage of ascent, until it reaches the top,—when deeming itself pretty safe it would seem, it quietly looks down upon the cause of its previous alarm, or flies at an advantage to a yet taller tree. Its note is very dismal.

g Those persons who are unacquainted with the surprising brilliancy of of many of our native birds, may be inclined to question the descriptive veracity of the text. They may suspect that its illustrations are somewhat too glossy—though poetically so. Yet its most vivid pictures are but faint semblances of the originals, in the light of whose ocular beauty, the most glowing and beamy words are absolutely dull and colorless. The word golden may be as beautiful as gold itself; the vocables diamond and ruby may be the one as brilliant and the other as rich as are the ideals of the gems they nominate; but the terms yellow and crimson and green do not carry with them, even in imagination, the whole luster of the colors so named, as we find them exhibited in the plumage of a free and living Australian bird. For there is live gleam or glory in them in that case, which no artificial hues, or symbols of hues, can ever be made to simulate, as there is an instant splendor in fire which transcends all painting. How indeed could the colors of the regent bird be adequately conveyed in words, or fully granted even in idea, so long as it were unbeheld, and consequently unrecollectable. That suberb creature must be seen with the bodily eye, and in the full plumed glow of its forest freedom, before we can have a believing conception of any thing so gorgeous. Then the diamond-bird, with its sky-blue wings bedropt with miniature stars—how might a poet fully describe its whole loveliness to the eye, or a painter even, with his watery colors, sufficiently paint it? And so of many other of our Australian birds—”things of beauty” that Poetry can only catalogue, in a more or less spirited manner at the best, and Painting only dimly intimate, or in attempting to do more than this, very miserably bedaub.

h The parrakeet thus classified from its always feeding upon the ground—on grass-seed it is likely—is a small bird of exceeding beauty. To some extent it is even more splendid than the yerowala. Its prevailing color is green, variagated with bright yellow blazes in the wings and tail. While at rest, however, it is a small green bird of no very brilliant appearance; but no sooner are its wings and tail dispread in flight, than it becomes vivid as fire. There are, however, several varieties of this kind of parrot, all somewhat differently colored; and one of these, though less splendid than the one above described, is yet more strikingly beautiful upon a close inspection.

i As I have before noted, there are at least two kinds of so-called magpies—the ‘black-and-white’, or Australian magpie proper, and the ‘black’ or migratory magpie, a species less spotted. Both these kinds of bird are remarkable for the beauty of their eyes, though the former is not in this respect at all comparable with the latter; the eyes of which are so strikingly fine, that my son Washington, when about four years old, was wont to refer to it through this characteristic—calling it “the big black bird with the new eyes”.

j Duaralli is the name which the Blacks of some parts of the interior give to the animal commonly called the kangaroo-rat.

k There are shadows at this time, for, be it observed, the sun is risen, though not yet visible from the particular stand-point now occupied by the hunters. A description of his first appearance to them over the mountains in front, shortly after, occurs in the following Part.