Part V.
High ’mid the hanging greenery
That drapes yon mountain’s misty side,
The foremost keeping Hunters—see
How they go straining, scattered wide.
—Six hold the lead; two, sorely tried
These follow; and two, afar behind,
Ancle-shocked through the game-tracks wind
With limping gait, and angered look
That tells how ill their plight they brook:
While almost even with the van,
But glenward more, a single man
Strains on with eager pace—
But vainly he so well hath sped,
For soon yon gorge’s passless head
Will wall him from the Chase!
And far he’ll have to hurry back
Ere he may then regain its track:
I guess that so to have gone astray
Will sharpen his wits another day.

But who are these that lead—on going
With a pace so freely flowing?
Five are sons of this sunny Land,
All fleet of foot and strong of hand.
The sixth is one with a foreign name,
Who o’er the seas a wanderer came.
‘Tis said, proud Fortune’s golden rays
Were shed o’er all his earlier days;
Till over him swept an evil wind,
To leave a life-long blight behind.

His brow is sad, his air depressed,
And a sigh oft labors aloud in his breast:
Yet to compete the challenged race
Full prompt is he, and in the Chase
Right eager—but, who hath seen the while
His shrunk cheek ever wear a smile?
A daysmana he, and his job once done,
Moody and lone, he wanders on.

But five are sons of this sunny Clime,
All quick with its spirit—its pristine prime!
And gifted thence with generous hearts
And bold brave wills, to fill Life’s parts
As men of a bettering time.
Nor own they bigot Custom’s reign,
Nor galls them old Oppression’s chain;
But here, unbowed by creeds, with God
Humbly they walk,—and fierce and plain,
Roam free o’er hills and vales where ne’er
The foot of a Tyrant trod,
Or the head of a fellow worm might wear
That frater fraud—a kingly crown!—
And in the echoing woods, when down
Thundering crash the primeval trees,
What men can wield the axe with these?
Or urging there the unwilling wedge,
So strongly swing the ponderous sledge?
In taming the stubborn steer to the yoke,
Or guiding the root-obstructed plough—
In bending the harvest to the hook,
Or plying hard the heavy hoe;—

In the bound of height—in the leap of length—
In laboring through the long trial of strength;
To rival these may few aspire;
Their limbs are thunder, their soul are fire!b

First Mileham, like a rushing tower,
Along yon steeping rock doth scour,
Spanning the frequent rift withal,
Gaily contemptuous of a fall!
Him the bard Linus follows fast,
The slimmest there, but ne’er the last—
A place amongst the foremost still
His flying foot and fiery will
Claim proudly, or on plain or hill:

For never was there Bard, but well
He loved in all things to excel.
—Sweet is the woodland voice of Spring;
But sweeter can young Linus sing:
How bright a painter is the Morn?
Yet brightlier can his light adorn
Whatever he loveth—soul or thing.
Hence can he, with creative hand,
Fling grace and gladness o’er the Land
Where stark and lonely most it lies;
And make at will, with charmful stave,
The Spirits of the mountain cave
Seem voices drawn from Paradise.
—Not always in these woods so lone
And wild, hath roamed that dreamy One:
Far from the scenes his memory loves—

Far from his birth-stream’s murmurous moan,
Poor and a wanderer he roves,
For his soul’s sake prized by none,
And filled, though young, with an old heart-ache
For much that, alas! did its deathway take
With the days that are over and gone:
When by the might of song he gave
Glad meanings to old Hawksbury’s wave,
And peopled all the bordering groves
With Graces and melodious Loves.

Where grass-treesc fringe the glenward edge
Of yon long sloping terrace-ledge,
Lo, Orland of the valley hies
Right forward with a dizzy heed;
There too the graceful Ossian flies
On, as with a wingéd speed;
While Gregory of the doughty deed,

With envious, space-devouring eye
Strains, body and soul, to pass him by!
But vainly, Gregory, mayst thou try:
Though mightiest in the village fray,
Thou hast a rival in the Chase,
For never might beholder say
Young Ossian’s rearward in the race!
—’Mongst those with whom he loves to be,
Though gentlest of the gentle, he
If needful ‘twere, might well command
The swift avenging warrior band:
Witness that memory haunting day,
When whooping forth in fell array,
Dark savages, like demons dread,
Amongst the backward dwellings spread
Dire rapine, death, and sore dismay!
Till, like a lion in his wrath,
He met them on their wasteful path,
A beardless War God in the way!
And smote them back, and as they fled
Littered the forest with their dead!
—And Ossian too is skilled
With cunning hand to build
Rhymes beautiful as strong:d

Hard eyes that had for many a year
Been tearless, have ran o’er to hear
His true and touching song;—
Old men have smiled as they smiled when young
While he hath framed some humourous lay—
Old men that smileless were for long
Until that day—that tuneful day
Whereon all care seemed wrong.

Yet higher upon the mountain side
Where kerrijongs, so brightly green,
Out from the upper crags are seen
Hitherward slanting,
There Will of the herd’s best mettle is tried
By the dark Jobber;—stride for stride
They burst the tangled brakes between,
Eager and panting.

And as, like Creatures of the Wild,
The Hunters thus keep hurrying on,
Against yon precipice up piled

Of mighty stone on stone,
Like giant ghosts their shadows glide,
Thrown sheer across the gorge, even where
‘Tis full a furlong wide!
A fearful sight to the dingo there
As he slinks along to his mountain lair;
And eke of wonder wild, no doubt,
To the eagle aloft, as he stareth out
O’er the whole wide view with his eyes of fire,
From the topmost stone of yon craggy spire.

Oh! these, I trow, are Woodsmen rare:
Yea, such their ready sylvan skill,
That where they once have known to fare,
The hidden turns of the lonely rill,
And the secret traits of each trackless hill,
Drear valley, and vistaless jungle, still
Are laid by their memories bare.
And thence full well do they all foreknow
Where plain or broken, high or low,
The forward ground shall tempt or force

The fagged and desperate kangaroo
To alter his instant course;
And thitherward by some shorter route
Straight tending, they shall keep in view
The Hunt as it shapes about.

And lo, even now, with that intent
Their course is suddenly westward bent;
For northward, with a circling sweep,
A rocky wall uprises steep
Against the fugitive’s escape;
And o’er those Hunter’s heads shall fall
The shadow of that rocky wall
Ere he can double its western cape:
And then, as past the greyhounds strain,
Well breathed, on with them, shall they start again.

a That is to say, a laborer who only hires by the day or week, or for the performance of a particular job that can be soon finished.

b It must be confessed that there is in this part of my Poem a rather strong infusion of a quasi national glorification. Nevertheless there is a bright bead of truth sparkling through the spirit of it, and mantling to the surface, like an evidence of good liquor. The physical completeness of my countrymen, as a race, is undeniable; and I believe their mental and moral capacitites only require adequate culture to become equally allowed and equally remarkable. A good national System of Education, by effecting this, would eventually make Australia the mother of one of the finest people in the world. And for how long shall the bigoted fears and party covetousness of irrational or dishonest sectaries be powerful enough to prevent her of this prime desideratum? Or are the soul-dwarfing and mind-distorting limitations andantagonisms of “chartered” and unchartered priesthoods, to curse the future of Australia as they have cursed the past of Europe?

That the native born Australians are naturally capable of the highest moral and intellectual developement—that is speaking generally—is a broad fact well attested to by Phrenology;—this organic excellence being itself, to my thinking, very largely assignable to the genial influences of a surpassing climate, operating conjointly with a happy admixture of races. And thoroughly advised of this great fact, I would even have my countrymen to beget in themselves a wholesome distrust of the ingrained prejudices of old-world guides and alien hirelings. For we are neither English, nor Irish, nor Scotch;—but Australians: and our career as a race should be full of boldness and invention, and as little imitative as possible. Wherefore I say again, a good System of national Education is our prime desideratum; and that in preparing the way for and devising the plan of such a System, we must in no wise fail to be true to ourselves and to our children. We must be bravely mindful of the noble inheritance which Providence has, in this broad Australia of ours, allotted to us and to them. And finally, in devising our System of national Education, we must be full of faith in the divinity of the Spirit of Knowledge; for by a full faith of this kind shall all knowledge be ultimately eviscerated of evil. We must have also an entire belief in the religiousness of Science; for all her revelations and veritable teachings are the indubitable scriptures and precepts of God.

(I preserve the above note, because it was the first trumpet-blast that was ever blown in this country, in the cause of National Education. Afterwards too,—whenever opportunity offered,—I was amongst the first who advocated the same cause in the Journals of the day. And my reward was obloquy: for there is none more persistently (though often unconsciously) unjust, than the misbeliever in the moral needfulness of knowledge. 1860.)

c The so called grass-tree must be pretty well known to almost every one who has been a few miles out of Sydney. The cane that grows out of its tuft, is used by the aborigines for the shafts of those light spears which they dart by means of the hooked stick called a womara. Its stem and roots exude a sort of pitch, which is also used by the Blacks, to fasten the iron-wood heads of the spears above mentioned into the shafts: and when grubbed up and dried, those parts of the grass-tree are excellent fuel.

d Under this name the author has characterised a very dear friend, who, in early life, was wont (as might be inferred from such a nom de guerre) to take his mental inspiration mainly from the Muse, and many of whose metrical pieces have been pronounced by competent judges, to breathe that subtle aura which, more than anything else, distinguishes poetry from prose, and which may be, and very often is, utterly absent from verse, however polished and elegant, or otherwise meritorious we may be inclined to consider it,—that is, when regarded upon its true level, or only as metrical composition.

Under the other names of the several hunters real persons are also characterised. The names only are fictions. The persons hidden under them were my brothers and the friends of my youth, and some of them, have since wandered I know not whither, and others—nay, the most of them, have now, in 1860, been long lying in their graves. Such swift and passing shadows are the poor sons of time.—And with respect to whatever of self-valuation may be very obviously reflected upon one of the persons thus adumbratively characterised, the author has nothing for it but to keep himself in countenance by the grace of certain poetic prescription which is founded upon much glorious usage, and is, moreover, as ancient as the hills. To do this, however, should be for him to do enough. The Poet has a kind of vocational right to no small liberty of self laudation; because, in him, arising as it does out of a generous desire of fame, which is but “love in disguise”, it is not selfishness; or because he has been pricked to it by neglect, or by wounded good-will;—and moreover, because it is often the only happy and grudgeless praise that he recieves (this praise from himself to himself) during his sojourn in a hard-eyed and ungenerous world, for all the beautiful forms and lovely idealities which his spirit bestows upon it. Never--the less, even in his case, when least thanked and most neglected, there must be, I suppose, a meet reward and acknowledgement somewhere—or at all events bare payment,—if not in money or money’s worth, or by office, or by influence; then in the final consequences of our being, or in the eternal tendencies of the soul.