Part VI.
The fog is all dispelled at length,
And dazzlingly the day’s young strength
Refracts from each moist rock, and through
Their foliage fretting, drinks the dew
In every gleaming tree;
For up in the vast of heaven anew,
A glorious sight to se[e]!
The sun hangs clear of each craggy height,
Like a blazing buckler burred with bright
And nimble shooting rays of light—
Even so aloft hangs he.a

But now the Flyer hath lost his pride
Of speed, and on the mountain’s side
Bounds shorter, stumbling as he goes;
While, as through the echoey throes
Along that hollow and cavernous way
Yearning forth into audible being,
The woodland Spirit might seem to say:

“Faint not thus, from ruin fleeing;
Child of the Forest, renew thy speed—
So sore is now thy need!
For oft amid these wild recesses
That creature that so near thee presses,
Is seen to drive his long gaunt shape—
But when did ever his quarry escape?
Then speed thee—Child of the Forest, speed—
Sore is thy need!”

The desperate wretch with mustered force
In hope of foiling, shifts his course—

But hark, that yelp! short, thick and hoarse,—
A hurried yelp of savage pride,
Tell back, that Lightning’s at his side.
Yet on together, hip to hip
On spring they, in dread fello[w]ship;
For the grim-jawed hound hath yet to seek
The ghasted Forester’s outstretched neck,
And there alone he’ll grip!
Like some dim demon of the wind,
Towler, half seen, sweeps hard behind;
And Whip, whose ardent sobs confess
His unrelenting eagerness,
Maintains with constant strain his place;
Then Lady and her yellow twain,
With all the rest, pour on amain;
While from the left apace,
Verging obliquely, lo, the train
Of foremost Hunters how they gain
Upon the closing Chase!

But mark yon copse of tough maroob
With ashen saplings pillared through,
And interlaced with thorns and briers,
And shotc with creepers that like wires

Wind up the higher wood;—
Upstretching even from the rill
That down yon gorge so wildly rude,
‘Neath wanton vines that flaunt at will,
Goes darkling with a lowly trill—
That dense copse vestures, like a hood,
The brow of the lonesome hill.
And snapt full oft hath such a copse
The strongest link of the Hunter’s hopes;
For thick within its savage regions
Rank upon rank, in woven legions,
Long lavish growths of runners rise,
Through which the hound his way must bore,
Even while his prey, with practised eyes
Detecting where the game track lies,
Bounds on, with Danger at his heels no more.

Is it hope gives sudden speed
To the jaded Flyer’s need?
Yea, he flattereth his care
With the show of refuge there.
His tramping waketh into voice
Within it many an obs[c]ure bird—
Loud is the green-bill’s scolding noise,
And Jehu’s urging notes are heard,
With Teleltella sounding bell
And the dog-bird’s sudden bark as well,d

As starting to the higher sprays,
Alarmed, they view the coming Chase:
While harder yet its victim strains—
For in the cries of that noisy throng
A promissory earnest reigns
To hearten him along:
To him, as near their clamours ring,
Seem they not even thus to sing?e

“Fellow child of the forest primeval,
Hitherward haste thee!
Gain our wild hold, and yon creatures of evil
In vain shall have chased thee!
Look! our guardian thorns shall meet
Their coming; our woodvines entangle their feet.

“Here secure doth the wallaroof feed
When down from his alp cometh he,

And the jimbucg, though wanting both cunning and speed;
And here, with the birds of the jungle,—free
As eagles that fly in the clouds of the sky,
Alone is there shelter for thee!
Haste then! haste with a resolute will—
Haste! that the Forest may know thee still!”

Right well the Flyer hath onward stretched—
A moment’s grace, and the Copse were reached!
Even now its spreading skirts (out tossed
In strips and clumps that stand alone,
As squadrons round a camping host
In lines and clouds are thrown)
Part hide him: now is he more near:
And now,—as about to disappear,

The Hunters shout at once their fear—
“Lightning, take heed! our chase is vain
If once the Flyer that jungle gain—
Thy speed were nothing there!”
Thus they—and in the dells about,
One to the other as it were,
“Nothing there!” the echoes shout—
“Nothing there!”

But shouted they in vain?
I trow not!—well their timely hint
That conscious hound hath ta’en.
For lo, by the energetic dint
Of one long leap,
Quick as thought his quarry is caught,
And, backward pulled, adown the steep
Wheels with him fastened, round and round,
With sideward tug and upward bound;
Till Towler, with a headlong aim,
Throws in his aid and weighs the Game
With lunging downfal to the ground!

Arriving in succession fast
The rest pour in—and to the last
All keen to grip, with bootless haste
Their yet remaining vigor waste:
Till up the foremost Hunters run
In silence, briefly touched each one
With pity,—a swift inward sting:
But soon the flaying is begun,
Soon endeed—and the quartering
As deftly also done:
Then harken how the mountains vast
Through all their echoey gorges ring
With calls that tell the slaughter’s past.

Like a king, full of glory, the Lord of the day
Hath passed from the world, in a wide
Flushing pomp of right royal display;
But though the West yet is with crimson dyed,
Out through the twilight so dubious ang grey
The slopes and the glens seem all swimming away
As the Bard who sang thus on the mountain side
Ends meetly his sylvan Lay.

And wonder ye not if his speech be uncouth,
Nor look ye much for his rhymes to be smooth,
Or that the flight should be lofty and free
Of one with so little of learning as he,
And all of whose aptest years were past
In primal solitudes wild and vast.

Thus nurtured,—self urged, first he knew
Australia’s virgin Muse to woo,

And of Song’s bright mysteries ‘gan to guess
With a lone self-cherished studiousness:
While toiling along the plough’s first tracks,
Or ‘twixt the strokes of the felling axe,
Or while upon the prairie wide
Where the savage whooped and the wild dog cried,
As round the squandered herd he hied.

Then be’t enough that his rhymes run o’er
A Sport that never was sung before:
Nor let the cavils of critic display,
In thankless return for the sylvan Lay
Which he hath framed in the joy of his heart
And poured on the winds of the world to day,
Give his spirit in lonely abashment to smart
(For the young are most hurt by denial alway)
And as homeward he wends with glad Whip at his side,
Humble the step of his bardic pride.

Final Copy.
a The reader will observe here, through the medium of the images introduced, the notation of the time. At starting the kangaroo, the sun was just seen as it were on the mountains: it now appears hanging clear of them in the sky. This will give—say twenty minutes or so, the pursuit being thus unusually prolonged, as before observed, by two circumstances—namely, an extraordinary power of endurance in the particular animal pursued, and a baulk which the hounds had met with a little before the time here noted. In general, the kangaroo either gets clear of the hounds altogether, or is overtaken by them and killed, in half the time here given, or in less time. Still, I believe that the license thus taken is perfectly allowable—the object of it being, to comprise as many characteristic circumstances as possible in the description of a single Hunt.

These remarks are not so much offered with any view of instructing the judgment of the intelligent reader—in which regard they may be needless—as for the purpose of forestalling in popular opinion the obtrusive cavils of that petulant tribe of self-installed Aristarchi,—the “small deer” of literature, who have been sedulous to acquaint themselves with nothing of critical art beyond its cant and captiousness; or who, on the other hand, are disposed to look for true mastery nowhere but in the rush-light performances emanating from members of their own petty clique,—the sole things they are wont to praise. But such critics, or rather criticlings, when they do praise, always very sufficiently indicate, in their very manner of doing so, the sort of fraternity to which they pertain: for they always praise with a vengeance! that is to say, with a vehemence of partiality that would only be laughable, if it were only foolish, and not amazingly reckless and pretensive as well.

(The above was written twenty years ago. At present I would only add, that no writer could be more conscious than I now am of the somewhat lonely--feeling fact, that I have long since left all my Australian critics many spiritual leagues behind me—all standing foot sore and winded on the lowermost ledges of Parnassus,—all looking self-convicted of much mistake, and very considerably puzzled as to the way upward. And hence it is, that now and for ever henceforth, I must be my own critic, whether veritably a Longinus or not. 1860.)

b Maroo is an aboriginal name of a sort of brush iron-wood.

c Shot, as it is here used, is a weaver’s term. When the general texture of a piece of clorth is pierced at intervals with a stronger or more costly thread, it is said to be shot with it.

d So much do the notes of this curious bird resemble the barking of a diminutive dog, that even one well acquainted with bush matters is at times so thoroughly misled by them, as to look around him for the whereabouts of the little four-footed companion of some fellow peragrator—until perhaps he detects the sounds as coming from the tree tops, and is so reminded of the bird written of.

e On the approach of any strange animal, the gregarious and other birds peculiar to those dense isolated brushes which often cloud up and render all but impassable the lower recesses of our mountains, will, on some occasions, appear to gather in the direction of the threatened invasion of their commonwealth, pretending all the while to a most valorous determination of defending it to the utmost. On such occassions, the pertinacity with which some kinds of them keep scolding away, and the fussy defiance of their attitudes are curiously amusing. But of the kangaroo and other familiar beasts they evince little or none of this provincial jealousy. And having observed further, that a hunted kangaroo will suddenly, as if advisedly, in whatever direction it may happen to hear the cries of certain habitual brush-birds, it struck me that I should be making a poetic hit, if I ventured to construe their clamours into some such incentive song of welcome as that which follows in the text.

f Wallaroo is the aboriginal name of a species of kangaroo which is peculiar to the higher and more difficult mountains. A wallaroo, when disturbed, will descend the sides of the steepest eminences with facility, by leaping from crag to crag, although these may stand many yards apart, on the edges of the clefts, or below each other in a step-like series. Hence he soon gets into a place of safety amongst caverns and ledges that are unapproachable to man or dog, and is seldom taken. But on a level this kind of kangaroo is far less fleet than the forester. It is also less elegant and tapered in form, having shorter and clumsier legs, and longer arms: and doubtless it has been thus adaptatively fashioned by Nature, in order to secure a perfect agreement between its powers of locomotion and the difficult ruggedness of the mountains which always form its habitat; for in ascending very steep places it often helps itself up with its long arms, whereas all other kinds of kangaroos only sustain their foreparts, when in the act of grazing, with their slighter and shorter ones.—The wallaroo also differs from the ordinary forester in color—the male being much darker, or almost black, and the female comparatively as much lighter, or more exactly, a sort of cream color.

g Jimbuc is an aboriginal name of little shag-haired species of kangaroo which is peculiar to mountain copses. It may be called the mountain wallaby, being in relation to the wallaroo what the common wallaby is to the kangaroo proper. The jimbuc is the least elegant in its form, and the dullest in its nature, of all the kangaroo kinds—of all such at least as I happen to be acquainted with. The Blacks of the Hunter call the sheep jimbuc, no doubt from a resemblance, however remote, arising out of the hairy shagginess of the one and the woolliness of the other. But this, like most other of our indigenous animals, is named variously by the aboriginal tribes of different localities: and is (or was) known amongst the Hawksbury mountains by the native name of whirring.