Part IV.
Now for the stirring Chase!
Now with a swift yet stealthy pace
Those recent trails, ye Hunters, trace!
Over the brook beneath yon slope—
The Jordan to yon Land of Hope,
They lead—and follow still their trace
With a swift and stealthy pace!

“Halt!—a knotted patch of greya
Crusts yon hillock’s grassy side—
Methinks upon another day
Aught like it, there, was never spied
Whilst coursing these same grounds, declare
Who noted such an Object there?”
The eyes of all, dilating wide,
Fasten thereon with a stedfast stare:
While, with one foot suspended, see
Each veteran hound how he tries the air
If tainted it may be;
Guessing instantly the cause
That gives his Masters so to pause.

“Comerades! yon thing, to my notion,
Hath at times a life-life motion:
Or is’t but the bushes stirred

Behind it—look you—to and fro
By the flirt of some frolic bird?
Yet again, with a wave-like flow,
Moves there nought beneath that brake?”

“Nothing, comerade, but the low
Dispersing fog’s fast thinning flake
Upswirling slow,
And breaking then, like a wasting dream,
Under the first broad-bladed beam
Of the round red sun—that, risen now,
Like a blazing chariot wheel
On yon dusk mountain’s radiant brow
Seems bloating, even as he did feel
Distent at heart with his own fire—
Bloating large, while rising higher,
With an unsteady sway, as though
He’d topple, and then rushing, go
Down into the shadowy glen below!”b

Still, as they again proceed
With a keen but noiseless speed,
Their doubtful glances oft are cast
At that grey Object—till at last

‘Tis nothing living is believed
By all—and are not all decieved?
Yet couched so closely keeps the Flock
No wonder they deem it a rough low rock.
But now, as they near it apace from the glen,
Their motions affright!
And with a short billowy movement then
Disturbing throughout, at once,—as some grey
Slab heaves at the blast of the miner,—away
It rushes and scatters in flight!
Wide out to the left now,
And out to the right,
From the ridge as if reft—how
It scatters in flight!

And as suddenly round
Bursts many a sound!
Loud and eager calls of men
With yelpings mixed, from side to side
Re-echo up the glen!
A brief while past, and the scene descried
Along that green ridge sloping wide,
Was stirless, as in Fable show
Those shores where Lethé sullen tide
Lies dark below:

Save that the mist, like a gauzy screen
There spread the boles of the trees between,
Or curled in the new-born airs about,
Or shrunk in the arrowy sheen:
But now ’tis rife with rapid life,
As, cunning in their terror,—out
Scatter the game—and scattering, seem
The spectral troop of some wizard dream!

Meanwhile the hounds
Close jostling all, a choice yet lack,
The more that choice abounds:
Some, suddenly breaking from the pack,
First one pursue, and then the next
That crosses—till at last, perplexed,
Stock-still they stand, or vaguely vexed
Upon their haunches sink:
Others their masters’ urgent shouts
For blame mistaking, backward slink
In fretful wavering affright;
Whilst others, as a covey doubts
Ere finally it taketh flight,
Mean, yet forbear, the forward leap,
Till the Game a settled course shall keep.—
The Hunters disappointment dread
And lose a hope in each glance a-head.c

But the puzzle soon is past:
For simultaneously at last,
As right behind the spreading rout
A brawny Flyer hath wheeled about,
Him the hounds dart at! He as fast
Turning from them, takes the lead
With all the wild worth of his speed—
Poured out in vain!
Even as a single cloud on high
Before a sudden hurricane,
Drives onward, through the homeless sky—
To die in rain!

Ho! the Hunt is well begun!
Steadily right away it lies:
Follow men, and as you run
Ply the hounds with cheering cries!
Get all you can—but nothing give,
For test their speed this day indeed,
Shall yonder forest Fugitive!

Still well forth the Hunt goes stretching,
With the Flyer rangeward fetching
More and more—till to its brow
Right strongly hath he strained: and now
Full on the ridge the wondering eye
Measures his bounds against the sky!
Then, as if wing’d, sheer down the heights
He skims with whizzing bounds—
Yon bank’s abrupt descent he slights
And gains the lower grounds!
Where dewy brake, and rocky scar
The green glen reefing like a bar,
The frequent dell and viny cleft,

And shaggy mound by torrents left,
With pools that gleam in the morning beams,
Go flying fast and far behind
As pastward fleet the shapes of dreams
In the life-hurry of the mind!
And soon all gain alike the glen—
The eager hounds and ardent men.d

Hey! ’tis a jolly sight to see
The hounds lay on so gallantly!
While, from their wakes, a shuddering sound
Comes swiftly backward as they bound.
—First red Lightning shoots along
As an arrow streams from the sounding bow—
Or, like and eagle’s, swooping strong,
His figure seems to flow!
Now lost—then for a moment found,
A streak—no more—along the ground!
Next, deep in grass, with head kept low,
And back hooped, like a globe of snow,e

White Whip pours out out his strength,
Forward evanishing; and then
Dun Towler’s wiery length
Is urged along the glen:
And where in greenest growth, a crowd
Of implicated woodvinesf shroud
The wild cat’s burrowy den,
Slim Lady, and her yellow brace
Of filial pupilsg, reaping space,
Shoot brightly past those leafy shrouds
Like meteors seen ’mid polar clouds:
Whilst all the rest, as speed gives place,
Stretch in a line upon the chase;

With fitful yelps forthwith ensuing
When full in view on bounds the Flyer,
As demons a doomed soul pursuing
Might threaten it in their vengeful ire.

Yet, though thus by Terror hurried,
Nothing failing, nothing flurried,
Leads the Flyer. Now he’s seen
Bursting through the tangled brakes;
Then yon rooty mounds between,
O’er the interrupting stakes,
On, with flying plunge, he makes!
Like a bark upon the sea
Bounding o’er the billows free—
Like a craggy stone descried
Rushing from a mountain side—
Like a thought that will not stay
Fancy’s questioning—away!
Anon he measures at a leap
The streamlet’s breadth though yawning wide,
And takes along the startled steep
That glooms beyond it, mist-enskied:
On which, but a moment past,
Not a sound, not a motion, was quaking—
But now, as beats its hollow side
A frequent tramp,—so sudden and fast
Its challenging echoes are waking!
As from some dreamer lying pale
Hollow muttered words come breaking,
When, startled by its swift advance,
His half arousing mind would hail
The passing Spirit of his trance.Meanwhile

Meanwhile, arriving at the rill,
The hounds in swift succession sink
Plumb down, sheer out of sight,—though still
To reappear in checked career
On its opponent brink;
Then up the solitary hill
In error all to strainh—until
The Forester’s again descried
Far flying, with unslackened will,
Along its shadowy side:
When, sudden as a hurricane
Forth broken from its mountain rack,
The huddled hovering pack amain
Swoops, sloping,—down upon his track.

a The appearance here described is often that of a closely-couched flock of kangaroos when beheld at a distance of a hazy morning. But they are only to be surprised in such a position where subject to little disturbance, and where their pasture is plentiful.

b To show how little, or at least how loosely observant of the commonest natural appearances are the great majority of persons, one has only to refer to the old popular superstition about the sun’s dancing of an Easter morning. Were it otherwise, such a notion could never have obtained even amongst the superstitious vulgar, because the newly risen sun will seem to dance whenever the atmosphere is in a certain condition, neither very hazy nor yet perfectly clear: or rather he will appear to bloat and wabble unsteadily, as if from internal distention. And thence it happens, that when first seen upon the sharp top of a mountain, his orb will often have that toppling and unpoised manner of appearance which I have attributed to it in the text. Nay, even when the atmosphere is quite clear, there is always, when he is rising, or when just risen, an apparent intervolment of motion, or seeming dilatation and contraction, in the blazing mass of his disc, such as the eye of superstitious expectancy (being studious of this appearance only of an Easter morning) might easily magnify into some actual manifestation of religious jollity.

c All the circumstances mentioned in this section must be supposed to pass almost momentarily—or at least in less time than their narration unavoidably occupies. This observation bears also upon other passages of the Poem. Indeed, an allowance of kind must be conceded as a matter of course, to any particular and minute description of several matters which occur together, or even in rapid succession.

d The men reach the glen as soon as the hounds by means of what is called “cutting off”—that is to say, by so adapting their course to the actual and anticipated deviations of the hunt, as in some measure to converge with it upon particular points a-head. Where the ground is well known, this may be often done; and their manner of doing it is fully shown in the ensuing Part, of which their movements, in particular, form the subject.

e This may appear to be what Pope wittily terms a “simile unlike”. Yet it is not. Amongst low bushes or high grass, a hound at the top of his speed, has a round or hooped appearance. The reason is this: his extremities are hidden, and keeping his head low, he gathers himself up so quickly in the act of bounding, that his back presents to the eye the semblance of a constant curve—the visible section of an orbicular body rolling rapidly away.

f What is here called the woodvine is a sort of shrub the boughs of which terminate in long leafy runners, exceedingly tough, and which clasp and climb, with many wild contortions whatever forestry of a higher growth may happen to neighbor them. But when several of these shrubs stand together, apart from other trees, these runners have no resource but to intertwine for mutual support,—thus forming a curiously woven canopy over the parent stems; or weighing them down at length, in their ultimate luxuriance, the whole mass, boughs and stems together, becomes a heap or clump of of singularly ‘implicated’ living cordage.

g Namely, two of her nearly full grown pups, which, after the manner of dogs—of the greyhound kind especially—put themselves, up to maturity, entirely under the discreet guidance of their respected dam; thereby affording an excellent example to their assumed betters—us humans—during our nonage. But wisdom too often cryeth in vain, in the field as in the street.

h The mistake of the hounds here described, is the error on their part which is referred to in the Preface, as being designed for the purpose of protracting the pursuit with due regard to probability.