Part II.
Under the grey dawning skies,
Behold a band of Hunters meet
On the grassy swell of a gentle rise
Befringed with the wattle so golden and sweet,
And backed by the Forest that, dreamily dim,
Looms out from the fog where it thinnest lies
‘Mid the boles of the saplingsa slim;
And thrown from which, the eye commands
Clearingsb and cultivated lands,
With rude-w[r]ought homesteads islanded,
Or farther forth some new-built shed:
There a band of Hunters meet!
All unincumbered are their hands
And fitly shod their feet.

And there is the man of England,—fair
His visage, and composed his air;
And there the sinewy Scot, with eye
That calculates incessantly;
The gay-souled son of Erin too,

Is found amongst that jolly crew,
And now he jests, and now he sings,
And loudest there his laughter rings:
But most in number with them stand
Men born and nurtured in the land.
‘Neath clustered, and swelling o’er
Young faces, high their foreheads tow’r,
So giving a command to eyes
Clear beaming as their native skies.
Taller and straighter than the rest,
With lanker loins and looser thighs,
And rounder in the upheld breast,
Their air is full of youthful zest,
Their carriage, springing from the knees,
Free and flowing as a breeze,
When stooping from some mountain crest
It sweeps the open leas.

At length the Band’s complete—the hounds
Are called; and Forward ho! upsounds
Through the still echoey morning tide;
And out in the wakened forest wide,
Doubling in the dells, it bounds;
And up in the mountain’s hollow side,
And down the stream’s indented shore,
Forward comrades—forward ho!
Echoes onward, spreading so
Into a dull and broken roar.
The house dogs bark; the poultry tribes
Crowding up in a startled throng,

Send from the yards an alarum along,
That well the Settlement’sc length describes:
Till many a rood away
The fog, as slowly it rolleth by,
Heavily sheets in masses grey
Round those who were but now so nigh,
And shrouds them from the following eye:d
When entering soon the Forest tall,
Thus to each other they merrily call.

“The owl and the bat, as ghost troop to their graves,
To the oak-shaded swamps, and the moss-hidden caves,
Have fled now or flee;
And the pitiless wild cat hath ceased to infest
The tortive tea-tree
Where the wood pigeon buildeth her nest.e

Uncovered no longer the forest dog prowls,
Though so bold in the dark;
And the kindynef  and bidawongg haste to their holes
In the spouts of yon old ironbark:

While on its one bare blasted limb
The gooburrah sits in the fog-wreath dim,
Glorying loud with a laughter-like glee
In the march of the dayspring’s victory,
As fast its conquering strength invades
The rear of night’s retreating shades.

“Oh! while above the eastern peak
The Morning lifts hisi lovely head,
As ‘twere to kiss Aurora’s cheek
Who calls him up from his ocean bed,
And from her silver scrip bedews
His way, and with divinest hues
Enwreathes his brow—so decked, to run
Meet herald of his sire, the Sun—
Oh! who to sleep would give the time
That thus in the Forest might drink its prime?

“For prospect ho! to yon mountain cone
With the cloud on its hunch-like rim—
To its topmost grey stone,
Through that cloud sublime
Jutting out sullen and dim,
Who will climb?
There split by many a craggy wedge
The wandering blasts for ever moan,
And the eagle sits in the hanging ledge
On his lonely throne;
And the lyre-birdj starts with clamours shrill
From rocks that wart the mighty hill,
Imitating as he goes
With very miracles of skill
The note of every bird he knows;
And under the layers that rib its side
The mountain lily in innocent pride,
Like the sole child of some grim Warden’s heart
All the days of her maidenhood dwelleth apart—
Dwelleth seldom espied,
Dwelleth rudely indeed,
But growing in grace in the rough ways of need.

“Ho! for the glens where the dewy woodvine
Festooning the brakes that the blueberries bear,
Gives them like fairy-built bowers to shine
Through the rents of the scattering mist—and where,
Full oft, the hurry-wing’d tempest-wind
Comes tumbling in its gusty flight
As if some fear were fast behind,
Sheer down from the peaks where the eagles soar;
Then rushing on, in its viewless might
Like a straitened stream doth roar.

“For the herby banks of the streamlets, ho!
Where the forestersk covet to feed,
And brothers, if there we start them, though
Like dream-born spirits they flit away
Through rolling swaths of the fog so grey,
I trow a wilder bounding speed

This day would fail their desperate need!
Glare shall it too with an eye of wrath
On the luckless emu that crosses our path!
And even the warragll vainly shall try
All his arts of escape—the red ruffian shall die!”

As answering with a knell
To the wild drift of their lays,
Lone Teleltellam from the dell
Tolls abroad his solemn bell:
Swinging aloft in the cedern sprays
The parrots scream their wonder out,
Or fly in bright companies round about:
Flopping up in a sable throng
The rooks their dismal ‘larums shout;
And the flute-birdsn dart from the kerrijong
Where late they mingled their mellow song:

From his dull dank haunt the staring owlo
Sends sounds as doleful as sounds may be,
The while innumerous namelessp fowl
Fluttering forth from tree to tree,
Or dodging along the bushy ground
In nimble clusters, clamor round:

The hawk stoops from his onward way
With sudden expectancy of prey,
And harm awaits the twittering thing
That, fearing man, with upward spring

Out into the clear shall go,
Trustful of its own swift wing!q
But well each warbler seems to know
From whence intends the deadlier foe,
And tremblingly familiar now
Cowers half concealed in the drooping bough,
As under or near it the Hunters press
Through the evergreen depths of the wilderness.

a In the inbroken skirts of the forest lying about new Settlements, there is always a greater prevalence of saplings than any where else; for no sooner are the old trees thinned away for building purposes and firewood, than a superabundant growth of slim pole-like young ones is sure to replace them, even to the extent of making a perfect brush of what was originally open woodland.—I note these minute matters, to show the reader that even the obs[c]urer strokes of this poem are every one of them home strokes.

b Of course cultivated lands are also cleared lands; but pieces of ground on which the timber has been felled only, preparatory to its being burned off, and the ground itself fenced in, are called clearings simply.

c T[h]e term Settlement is here used in a very restricted sense. It is applied in fact to a small location having eight or ten farm houses within view of each other, but not standing regularly enough, nor sufficiently close together, to be denominated a village.

d A fog appearance such as I have here described is not of very frequent occurrence. I recollect to have witnessed only two or three such: a vast bank of vapour broken up and compressed as it were by a descending stir in the atmosphere, and then rolling off in heavy masses. And besides, I have described it in the text, not so much as it would appear to the hunters themselves, as to the ‘following eye’of an observer at some distance from them, in the clear. Fogs, in this country, generally disperse imperceptibly.

e The wood pigeon called the bronze-winged, invariably builds its nest either in a tea tree or a native oak. The tea tree, however, is the greater favorite with it as a nesting place, and it only resorts to the latter kind of tree in localities that happen to be destitute of the former. I cannot give any decided reason why this bird should thus prefer to breed in either the one or the other of these two kinds of tree, since they are apparently not a whit more commodious for the purpose than a multitude of others. But I can state it for a positive fact, that I have never yet seen a bronze-wing’s nest (and I have seen some hundreds) in any otherthan a tea tree or an oak.

I have sometimes been disposed to think that the preference of the bird might possibly be founded in the peculiarly mournful and cooing--like responses which the wind draws from the foliage of both the tea tree and the native oak. But then the wind-sound is deeper toned, if not more continuous, in the oak than it is in the tea-tree,—a circumstance that in some degree discountenances the above supposition, inasmuch as the latter is, notwithstanding, the greater favorite with it for building in.

f Kindyne is an aboriginal name of the small and beautiful kind of opossum commonly called the ‘ring-tailed’—so designated from the end of its tail being curiously adapted to clasp the smaller boughs of the trees, to which the animal thus securely ties itself while feeding upon the tender sprouts of such of the outer sprays as are too slight of themselves for its support; and it suspends, and then swings itself by the same means from branch to branch so as to pinge upon them with its fore paws, amd so shift from one to the other.

g Bidawong is an aboriginal name of the animal which the Colonists have called the flying squirrel. I say an aboriginal name, because almost every tribe of Blacks has a different set of names for our indiginous animals. The bidawong, like the kindyne, is a noctivagant animal, and less like the European quodruped after which it has been partly named by the early Colonists, than that circumstance would import to persons unacquainted with its actual appearance.

h Gooburra is an aboriginal of the large kind of king-fisher which is commonly known by the tasteful and poetic sobriquet of the Laughing Jackass. It is sometimes otherwise called the ‘snake-killer’, because of its preying upon reptiles. And in the early times of the Colony it was pretty generally known also by the name of the ’Settler’s clock’, being thus called on account of those poorer sort of farmers who in the parlance of the period were designated as “dungaree settlers” (from a cheap Indian cotton stuff usually worn by them) mostly using to regulate the hour of arousing their assigned servants to labor by the laughter-like peals which it invariably utters just before and after daybreak. The following “elegant extract” from a song that was once popular amongst certain of the inhabitants of Windsor during the Author’s boyhood, is rather humorously illustrative of this particular bygone. The song itself was a somewhat lugubrious chronicle of the unpleasant surprises experienced by some newly arrived convict during the first week or so of his assignment.

“Next morning, as I lay a-bed,
A thinking on my woe,
I hears a something near the crib
Begin for to ha and hoo:
By jabers! what is that? says I,
It gave me such a shock!
Why, laughing answered an old chum,
That ‘ere’s the Settler’s Clock.

“With that I peeps all through the slabs,
And to my surprise did see
A most remarkable looking Bird
A laughing on a tree!
And at the same time twigged the Cove
His franda door unlock,
Crying Up to your work, you lazy hounds,
For don’t you hear the Clock?”

Singularly enough, it was the above rude and vulgar stanzas that more forceably than anything else impressed upon me the fact, that to make any matter, of what kind so ever, the subject of set or artistic thought, is not only to exalt, but in some degree to cleanse it—to lift it into both a higher and a purer state of being; and that in this one fact itself we come upon the underlying or fundamental charm of all poetry, and indeed, of all that is properly called literature.

i This masculine impersonation of the Morning, as distinct from Aurora the goddess of it, is quite contrary to all so-called classical usage. But the Poets of these days should be as free men as the first Poets were, creating as independently, in all provinces of the Ideal, if it so please them. In a word, they should restrict themselves to the mythological figures of old Greece and Rome only in so far as they may fall in spontaneously with the ideality of the moment. This, at all events, is the liberty I reckon upon for myself, being assured that in the end it will prove self-justifying.

j The bird here designated as the lyre-bird is commonly called the wild pheasant. It bears, however, no relation, or a very remote one, to the European fowl after which it has be[e]n so named, and resembles it only in having a long and beautiful tail. For this reason, and from having seen it described in certain ornithological papers in an English periodical under the head of the Lyre Bird of Australia, I have designated it as above. And inasmuch as the shape of the bird’s tail has a curious resemblance to that of the Grecian lyre of Timotheus, the appellation may be considered as being a very appropriate one. Nevertheless, I find that it has led even the Author of the ‘Vestiges’—a writer who is generally so accurate in his statements—into the mistake of supposing, that it had been conferred upon the bird on account of the fineness of its song, and not because of the mere shape of its tail. Yet the lyrebird is curiously remarkable also on the score of its vocal capacity. Like the mocking-bird of America, it is a forest mimic, and imitates the notes of most other wild fowl—even the boisterous cachinnation of the gooburra and the whistle and crack of the coachman—with a wonderful fedelity;—a characteristic which, I think, is but little known.

k Forester is the term generally to the kangaroo proper—namely, that of the ordinary open forest lands, to distinguish it from that of the high mountains, the wallaroo, and also from that of the thick brushes and blady-grass flats, the wallaby. There are, however, several kinds of foresters: the grey-brown common sort; the large red species, rather scarce; the blue flyer, still rarer; and a white kind, of which the Writer has only heard, but from good authority, with some other varieties.

l Warragl or warragle (pronouncing the final syllable as we do the gle in the word struggle) is an aboriginal name of the native dog. So also is dingo: almost every tribe of Blacks (even neighboring tribes) having a different name for it.

m Teleltella is an aboriginal name of a large and solitary kind of bell-bird. But, unlike the small kind, which emits but a single sound, like the one tinkle of a tiny bell, the teleltella has several notes, sounding, altogether, exactly its name, with the first two syllables dwelt upon thus: tèl–èl–tella.—Since the foregoing was written I have seen, at Lowesfield, a variety of this bird with a different song, which might be written thus: Tong, tong,–tong, tul,–wulk: the last note being sweet and liquid in the extreme, though short and ending abruptly, like a sudden musical bubble.

n What I have here called the flute-bird is the dwarf magpie mentioned in a preceding note, as being sometimes confounded with the butcher bird—a fowl that somewhat resembles it, though smaller and less brightly colored, and having the upper mandible considerably more hooked at the end. And besides these differences, the butcher bird half spreads and shivers its wings all the while it is singing.

o The daytime haunt of the owl (in that part of the country which I had in my eye when the text was written) is usually in the densely topped tea trees growing in the swampy estuaries of permanent lagoons. Of course such places are but seldom traversed, and thence no doubt are the chosen, from an instinct of their peculiar safety, by their sunblind inhabitant. Besides, the everlasting twilight which pervades them, from the scoop of the ground, the mugginess of the air, and the intermixing tops of the tea trees, must render them, of itself, particularly agreeable to such a bird.

p Nameless, or having names that would “stick in the soft muse’s gullet,” as Byron somewhere writeth of Russian patronymics. Never were God’s creatures named—or rather nick-named—after a more barbarous fashion than were our native birds by the first comers. Take, for example, the following string of these appellative sobriquets: there are, or were, old-soldiers, bald-headed-friars, hopping-charleys, native-companions, laughing-jackasses, doctor-faustuses, gorgers, cock-tails, bobtails, and governor-favauxs. Of the last name, however, it may be remarked that no two sounds could more closely resemble the notes of the bird so called; and as it is also likely that this resemblance itself was first detected during Colonel Favaux’s temporary administration of the Government of the Colony—I, for one, should be half inclined to let it pass. Native-companion too, may have been bestowed upon that singular bird by some one having a small spice of ideality of the John Bunyan type—but for the others! they “fright the Muse from her propriety,” and are only fit to conjure with, like the names of Glendower’s devils. Yet, for the sake of a passing joke, let us even try how they would serve in rhyme.

Morning.
With purple-tinct fingers Aurora is drawing
Apart the bed-blinds of the jolly-faced Day,
While in yon old ironbark loudly jawing
Are two laughing jackasses—jawing away!

Beautiful change hath inspired the creation!
And bobtails and cocktails sing sweet in the briar;
In the gum-tree the gorger pours forth his oration,
And below in the wattle the bald-headed friar.

Old soldiers are piping in every thicket,
In flocks hopping charleys come chattering by,
And see, Doctor Faustus—that conjurer wicked,
Is getting well trounced by a testy old pie!

Long-leggëd native companions are freakingx
In the clears of the flats where the spear-grasses grow,
While from tree top to tree top a hawk there is sneaking
(As some land-griper used) after Governor Fovaux.

x These birds do literally dance, and not ungracefully. The cock takes his place betwixt his two hens (two are his complement), and the whole three begin the caper together. Then the cock backs out of the line, and extends, say, the right wing, under which the hen on that side dips gracefully, passing out beyond him; and then the left wing is extended in like manner, for the other hen to dip under it and out beyond him, just as the first did: and so the dance proceeds and continues for perhaps half an hour.

q There is a species of hawk—a native falcon in fact—that is wont to hang upon the tracks of a peragrater in the Bush, with the manifest object of swooping down at an advantage after such low-keeping and defenceless birds as may be started by his approach out of their coverts. This is especially the case when one happens to be wending along the high-grassed and briary banks of rivers and creeks abounding in quail—a bird that never rises into flight, except it be started by the sudden presence of a real or supposed enemy in the shape of man or beast. And as on an occasion like this, they whirr up before your dog or yourself, some falcon that has been expectantly attending your motions (now hovering overhead, and now alight in a tree close behind) will throw itself after them with amazing velosity,—whizzing like a bullet,—and with a precision that is almost inevitably fatal. The only chance the poor quail has, and of which it often avails itself, is to close it[s] wings and drop at once, like a stone, into the briars or high grass.